---
title: Wrapped-up Readings 2025-01-17
date: 2025-01-17
tags:
  - link-blog
---

In this week's reading update, we delve into diverse topics from the evolving landscape of AI and its impact on business models, to the strategic challenges faced by Boeing due to entrenched leadership shifts. Key highlights include the reduction in AI training costs of models and the rising need of AI  product management.

## AI

- [The Batch](https://info.deeplearning.ai/tumbling-training-costs-desktop-ai-supercomputer-tighter-ai-export-restrictions-improved-contrastive-loss-2): The article discusses several key developments in AI technology and policy as of January 2025. AI training costs are dropping significantly, prompting a shift in software development that emphasizes the role of AI Product Management. This emerging field requires diverse skills, including technical proficiency in AI, iterative development, and data management. Due to these demands, there is a growing need for skilled AI Product Managers. In parallel, new AI models such as DeepSeek-V3 are delivering impressive performance at dramatically reduced costs, highlighting the potential for broadened accessibility to advanced AI technologies. The U.S. is tightening export restrictions on AI chips and models, establishing a three-tiered hierarchy that controls access based on geopolitical relationships. These restrictions are part of a broader strategy to maintain U.S. technological leadership and security, although they could incite other countries to develop alternative supply chains and reduce reliance on U.S. technology. The article also notes that President Biden has initiated plans to expand domestic and allied AI infrastructure, with a focus on clean energy and rapid development. These measures reflect the ongoing geopolitical and economic impacts of AI advancements.
- [Prompt Tuning PEFT](https://huggingface.co/learn/cookbook/prompt_tuning_peft): The "Open-Source AI Cookbook" by Hugging Face introduces an additive fine-tuning technique called Prompt Tuning, which enhances AI models without altering their original weights. This approach involves training additional layers linked to prompts, allowing models to express acquired knowledge effectively within those prompts. The primary advantage is the reduced number of parameters needing training, ensuring that the pretrained model's behavior remains unchanged, improving efficiency, speed, and cost-effectiveness. The cookbook demonstrates training two models using datasets of prompts and inspirational sentences with a foundational model from the Bloom family, achieving results quickly on modest hardware. This technique allows easy experimentation with different models, epochs, and configurations, emphasizing its practical benefits and versatility in AI model fine-tuning.

## Real estate

- [El Banco de España multa con 590.000 euros a Sociedad de Tasación y su cúpula](https://www.idealista.com/news/inmobiliario/empresas/2025/01/10/827155-el-banco-de-espana-multa-con-540-000-euros-a-sociedad-de-tasacion-y-su-cupula): El Banco de España ha multado a Sociedad de Tasación y su cúpula con 590,000 euros debido a una infracción "muy grave" relacionada con deficiencias en su organización administrativa, técnica o de personal y en sus procedimientos de control interno. Estas carencias han impedido que la entidad garantice su capacidad para entender las condiciones del mercado inmobiliario, cumplir uniformemente con las normas de valoración, mantener la independencia profesional de accionistas o clientes, y controlar las obligaciones de incompatibilidades de sus profesionales. Sociedad de Tasación presentó un plan de acción en abril para cumplir con los requerimientos del Banco de España, centrado en el ejercicio de inspección al 31 de diciembre de 2021. La entidad ha asegurado que implementará completamente este plan antes de julio para alinearse con las mejores prácticas del sector. El Banco de España, bajo la dirección de José Luis Escrivá, ha estado revisando las principales tasadoras del país para mejorar los procedimientos según los estándares del sector.

## Business models

- [Stackable Business Models in the Age of AI](https://www.nfx.com/post/stackable-business-models?utm_campaign=NFX%20Newsletter&utm_medium=email&_hsenc=p2ANqtz-_TWtKmuGxu36mC6DVfHfUUbvc0LFUSgDyFA1OcuFc4ljarq2WdPxtixP-7OODY3gBT5KIl1on3zR3BNYgsmE8UCWY49w&_hsmi=341783199&utm_content=341783199&utm_source=hs_email): In "Stackable Business Models in the Age of AI," NFX explores how AI startups can succeed by continuously innovating not just in technology, but in business models that deliver and capture value over time. The article highlights challenges faced by many AI companies, such as high initial growth with low user retention, and difficulties in monetization, with only 58% of startups generating revenue from their generative AI products. The key to success lies in developing comprehensive business strategies that stack various models to increase revenue per customer, improve retention, and decrease churn. Successful models often combine existing frameworks in novel ways and add new value streams. For instance, AI companies might start with core offerings and gradually introduce advanced features like API access, custom training, or consulting services. Pricing strategies have also evolved, moving from on-premise to SaaS models, and now towards usage or outcome-based pricing. The piece also covers strategies like price disruption and quality innovation, which leverage AI to offer cheaper or superior services, respectively. Startups are encouraged to focus on foundational business metrics to sustain growth, rather than prioritizing expansion at all costs.

## Online Marketplaces

- [JP Morgan Global Online Classifieds Report 2024: Key Highlights Include REA, Scout24 and Rightmove](https://www.onlinemarketplaces.com/articles/jp-morgan-global-online-classifieds-report-2024-key-takeaways/): The "JP Morgan Global Online Classifieds Report 2024" highlights significant shifts in online marketplace ratings, noting that REA Group and Scout24 SE have been upgraded to Overweight due to strong growth prospects. Meanwhile, Domain and Rightmove were labeled Underweight, facing challenges in revenue and strategic execution. CoStar Group maintained its Overweight status with commendable subscription-based revenue and growth potential. The report also mentions an Overweight status for European operators like Prosus, Naspers, and Schibsted, with Scout24 seen as a top pick for its growth and valuation. Core themes like digitalization, AI integration, and industry consolidation are expected to shape the market, with significant mergers and acquisitions anticipated, including CoStar's potential further consolidation in Europe. The report sees opportunities in new digital capabilities and dynamic pricing, with the likelihood that consolidation could intensify, as reflected in recent deals such as Adevinta's take-over. Cost management, especially in headcount efficiency, remains crucial for growth in this capital-light industry.

## Management

- [Why Boeing’s Problems With the 737 MAX Began More Than 25 Years Ago](https://www.library.hbs.edu/working-knowledge/why-boeings-problems-with-737-max-began-more-than-25-years-ago): Boeing's ongoing difficulties, particularly with the 737 MAX, can be traced back to cultural and leadership shifts initiated over 25 years ago. While the immediate crisis was triggered by two devastating crashes in 2018 and 2019, deeper issues are attributed to strategic decisions made by former CEOs. The acquisition of McDonnell Douglas in 1997 introduced a cost-cutting culture that diverged from Boeing's engineering-focused ethos. This trend was compounded by the decision to move Boeing's headquarters from Seattle to Chicago in 2001, disconnecting corporate leadership from the engineers. Harry Stonecipher's leadership further entrenched this culture shift, emphasizing short-term profits over innovation, and denying proposals for new aircraft designs in favor of leveraging older models. This short-term focus led to design compromises, like a flawed software update in response to potential stall issues in the 737 MAX, which were not properly communicated or disclosed, resulting in fatal crashes. Successive CEOs perpetuated these strategic errors, neglecting to address fundamental safety issues. As a result, Boeing not only faces financial losses but also a damaged reputation. The task now falls to CEO David Calhoun to redress the company's course by reinstating a culture of excellence in aviation engineering, an undertaking seen as vital to restoring Boeing's industry leadership and overcoming its long-term challenges.

