
---
title: 202210241310 - Make'em talk
Date: 2022-10-24
topic: #management
links:
tags: permanent-note 
---

Data based projects are usually quite difficult to land because stakeholders requirements are fuzzy and ill-defined. 

The truth is that it is usually quite difficult to define upfront data based products. We can have some kind of understanding of the functional requirements that they must fulfill, but we usually lack the context to build a proper solution. 

In my experience, you can have as many meetings as you want to design a first version, but they will probably be totally uneffective. Something that works remarkbly well is to make people talk. Buy how do you make people talk in an effective way? 

One of the easiest and more productive ways to make people talk is to create something that they can use, touch and see. Sometimes it might be a table inside a database that we can send as a csv file to be inspected in spreadsheet software. Or maybe it is a simple dashboard. Or sometimes it might be an API.  

Some of these produced materials might be discarded by the end of the project, or they might just be left behind in the bottom of a document, or they might be the main way for the users to interact with our solution. We usually are unable to know in advance.

Some people might notice that this is an inefficient way of handling work. It is not desirable, but there are situations when you can truly benefit from spotting these difficulties in advance and make the roll ball without too much hustle. 










